# My Brackeys Jam 2023.2 Experience
###### Released August 27 2023

Brackeys Game Jam is a game jam hosted by the Brackeys community. Brackeys was a game developer who used to run tutorials, but has decided to stop game development to do other things; However even though things are done there, the community decided to keep things running, and the Brackeys Game Jam resumes.

I decided to take part in it and create my own game using C++ and Raylib, to not only pad my resume, but share what I can make in C++! And so I made Mariana's Trench - The Game.
## Day 1 - Planning
Day 1 was not very special. I had a busy day already, but I covered a few different things:
- Programming Language
- Game Idea
- Requirements

For the programming language, I went with C++ as that is what I have been studying recently, and I had some boilerplate code lying around that I wanted to use for a framework.

The game idea that I came up with was a game similar to [The Oregon Trail](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Oregon_Trail_(1985_video_game)). The idea is that you are a startup company trying to build a submarine that can reach the bottom of Mariana's Trench. you start off by building a generic submarine, and you have to sell research information to make money. You are also compensated based on the quality of your submarine. However, if you lose your submarine underwater, your new submarine starts from scratch, and all value put into the submarine is gone. You can always quick travel to the top before it's too late, but you will never know when the line is crossed.

For this game I at least needed the following components:
- Title Screen
- Exploration Scene - Exploring the Underwater
	- Randomly selected scenarios
- Upgrading Scene - Upgrade the Submarine
- Rewarding system

To start off, I just finished getting the ideas down, and using the boilerplate code, I setup a window that won't really be touched for a while.

## Day 2 - Exploration
For today, I started programming the exploring scene. This took a little bit of work, but there were a few different components I needed to consider.
1. The speed of the submarine over time
2. Encounters

### The submarine
This was actually very fun to program. Although it is not realistic, I wanted to make the submarine slow down the deeper it gets so that it is harder to reach the bottom of Mariana's Trench. The velocity of a modern submarine is around 8 m/s, while the depth of Mariana's Trench is around 11034 m.

>[!tldr] **TLDR**: $v(d)=\frac{v_0}{d_f}(d_f-d)$

> [!info] Finding the velocity of the submarine:
> I started off with the following equation, and had to solve for s:
> $$D(t)=11034-11034e^{-st}$$
> If you are familiar with solving differential equations, you may be able to skip this part and continue following along. First I derived that formula because I needed to find the velocity of the submarine.
> $$v(t)=\frac{dD(t)}{dt}=11034se^{-st}$$
> from there, I knew that the initial velocity in this example should be 8 m/s, so I plug in and solve the following:
> $$v(0)=8$$
> $$11034se^{-s(0)}=8$$
> $$11034s=8$$
> $$\therefore s=\frac{8}{11034}$$
> now that we plugged these values in, we know the rate of the velocity function. However, we only know it in respect to $t$. therefore, we need to manipulate the formula so that we can find the velocity relative to the distance from the surface of the ocean. The submarine slows down depending on how deep into the ocean we are. now how long we've been in there for. Since we know the velocity function too, we also know the relationship between the distance and velocity function:
> $$D(t)=11034-\frac{v(t)}{s}$$
> now we solve for velocity in relative to the distance.
> $$\frac{v(t)}{s}=11034-D(t)$$
> $$v(t)=s(11034-D(t))$$
> $$\therefore v(d)=s(11034-d)$$
> and now that we know the relation between the numbers, we can write it as followed:
> $$v(d)=\frac{v_0}{d_f}(d_f-d)$$

### Random Encounters
These were straight to the point. Your odds of running into an encounter would be 1/3, but your odds are 1/*number of possible encounters* * 3. So after every iteration of the velocity added, you would have a 1/3 chance of an encounter, and 1/*possible encounters* * 3 of a specific encounter. Currently, I've only programmed 4 different encounters minimally, and will add more later in the jam.

## Day 3 - Upgrading Scene, and Implementing Gameplay

This is a simpler day luckily, but I could not focus as much due to the noise outside (they did renovations right in front of the balcony lol). Here's what I've covered:
- Upgrading the submarine
- Rewarding the player for exploration
- Assembling a form of UI for the engine
- Actually making something playable in a window

### Upgrading the submarine

For this component, I needed to figure out a rewarding system. For now the formula for rewarding is as followed
$$
P_{payment}=100D_{submarine}+500R_{data}
$$
Meanwhile, costs are determined as followed:
$$
C(s, \Delta s)=\Delta s^{s/\pi\Delta s} 
$$
$\pi$ is not needed, but it allows for a more gradual but exponential increase.

### Creating a UI
This was not that bad. The UI is straight to the point, I just put the buttons and labels in the corners. However, I had to create some UI components to get the workspace running properly. These were Labels, and Buttons.

## Day 4 - The Graphics and The Consequences
Today was unfortunately a day where I really could not work on the game as much. However, here is what I have gotten done.

### Programming Consequences
I was not sure how to program this part as it felt like if I made it so that there is no way to turn back, then it is just going to be more painful for the player to wait. So for now I just made it that if you run out of oxygen, then your sub implodes.

### Graphics
It is about time that I got some graphics actually done. I designed a quick logo, and started programming a few graphical components for the game. This included an Image class, and an UIImage class.

For a feature of the Image class, I made it so that it would draw the asset in the middle of the point requested. Little did I know that this would bite me back when making the UIImage class. (ouch...) I will have to program one function for drawing center, and one for drawing at any point I guess, but I don't think I will have time for that.

For the graphics, I also made a quick placeholder background for when upgrading the submarine. The reason for this is so that I could figure out what the itch.io page will look like.

## Day 5 - Smoothing Things Out
Today I should have all of the main content of the game done. Now, I just need to start smoothing things out so that it feels more like a modern game. To start off, I cleaned up the graphics that I had so far. Specifically, I fixed classes that included text such as `Dorian::Button` and `Dorian::Label`. After, I got started on animations.

### The `Animated<class T>` Class
This was a fun class to make. This allowed me to take any type, and create an animated variable out of it. The method of animation used in the game is linear interpolation ($y=mx+b$) Although this could be programmed to support any type of interpolation. If I had time, I would make an interpolation algorithm for easing between two points as that would look nicer for the submarine.

This was used to program a fader to transition from scenes, and the ship's Y axis on the screen.

I also started production on a decently constructed itch.io page. I really like how this looks, and I am looking forward to putting my game on it.

## Day 6 - Audio
I am starting to run out of time for to add to my game. I plan to finish tomorrow by improving the scenarios, and actually balance the game, but we'll see what happens.

### Audio Manager
I borrowed sound effects from [50 Menu Interface SFX by ColorAlpha](https://coloralpha.itch.io/50-menu-interface-sfx). Honestly, awesome SFX pack! :D

I was originally going to program a full on sound pool, but I decided that I was starting to feel burned out of the game jam, so for now, I just made a typedef of a `std::vector<Sound>` and called it a `Dorian::SoundPool`. Same thing with calling `Music` a `Dorian::Song`. If I had more time to put more effort into it, That would be the first thing I would correct to work nicer. I also ran into issues with how the audio library was working which took me forever to debug, but that eventually worked.

I also made a small song to compliment the upgrading screen. I like how it sounds, and I hope it works well for the rest of the game!

## Day 7 - Release
At this point, the game is practically done. I am looking for ways to touch it up and look nicer, but at this point, I think it is ready for game jams. I changed the prices to ui128 (unsigned long long int) so that the endgame upgrades are actually affordable, (and not negative), and I don't see any other way to improve the game.

From there, I released the game to download, and finished the game development from there.

# Post-Mortem
Overall, I would personally say that this was my best game jam yet. There are however things I think we should